[Doc] Streaming generator alpha doc (#39914)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-core/ray-generator.rst

.. _generators:

> Ray Generators 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray generators
```

==============

`Python generators <https://docs.python.org/3/howto/functional.html#generators>`_ are functions

> that behave like an iterator, yielding one value per iteration. Ray also supports the generators API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that behave like iterators, yielding one value per iteration. Ray also supports the generators API.
```

.. code-block:: diff

    +import ray
     import time

     # Takes 25 seconds to finish.
    +@ray.remote(num_returns="streaming")
     def f():
         for i in range(5):
             time.sleep(5)
             yield i

    -for obj in f():
    +for obj_ref in f.remote():

>          # It is printed every 5 seconds, not after 25 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         # Prints every 5 seconds and stops after 25 seconds.
```

    -    print(obj)
    +    print(ray.get(obj_ref))

> The above Ray generator yields the output every 5 seconds 5 times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above Ray generator prints the output every 5 seconds for 5 times.
```

When you use a normal Ray task, you have to wait 25 seconds to access the output. 

> With a Ray generator, the caller can access the object refeference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a Ray generator, the caller can access the object reference
```

before the task ``f`` finishes.

> **Ray generator is useful when**

Reviewer 2: We should also talk about when this is not preferred?

Basically help user decide whether to use static num_returns or streaming num_returns.

Author: Hmm should we add a new section? I feel like it should be a pattern / anti-pattern doc rather than this doc?

- You want to reduce heap memory or object store memory usage by yielding and GC the output before task finishes.
- You are familiar with Python generator and want the equivalent programming models.

**Ray generator is used by Ray libraries to support stremaing use cases**

> - :ref:`Ray serve <rayserve>` uses Ray generators to support :ref:`streaming responses <serve-http-streaming-response>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Ray Serve <rayserve>` uses Ray generators to support :ref:`streaming responses <serve-http-streaming-response>`.
```

- :ref:`Ray data <data>` is a streaming data processing library, and it uses Ray generators to control and reduce concurrent memory usages.

**Ray generator works with existing Ray APIs seamlessly**

- Ray generators can be used in both actor and non-actor tasks.

> - Ray generators work with all actor execution model, including :ref:`threaded actors <threaded-actors>` and :ref:`async actors <async-actors>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ray generators work with all actor execution models, including :ref:`threaded actors <threaded-actors>` and :ref:`async actors <async-actors>`.
```

- Ray generators work with built-in :ref:`fault tolerance features <fault-tolerance>` such as retry or lineage reconstruction.
- Ray generators work with Ray APIs such as :ref:`ray.wait <generators-wait>`, :ref:`ray.cancel <generators-cancel>`, etc.

> Getting Started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting started
```

---------------

> You have to define a Python generator function and specify ``num_returns="streaming"`` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define a Python generator function and specify ``num_returns="streaming"`` 
```

> to create a Ray generators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to create a Ray generator.
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_define_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_define_end__

> The ray generator task returns ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` (API is subject to change), which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ray generator task returns ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` (the API is subject to change), which is
```

> compatible to generator and async generator APIs. It means 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compatible to generator and async generator APIs. You can access the
```

> ``next``, ``__iter__``, ``__anext__``, ``__aiter__`` APIs are accessible from the class. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``next``, ``__iter__``, ``__anext__``, ``__aiter__`` APIs from the class. 
```

Whenever a task invokes ``yield``, a corresponding output is ready and availabale from a generator as a Ray object reference. 

> You can call ``next(gen)`` to obtain a object reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call ``next(gen)`` to obtain an object reference.
```

> If ``next`` has no more item to generate, it raises ``StopIteration``. If ``__anext__`` has no more item to generate, it raises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``next`` has no more items to generate, it raises ``StopIteration``. If ``__anext__`` has no more items to generate, it raises
```

``StopAsyncIteration``

> ``next`` API will block its thread until a next object reference is generated from the task via ``yield``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``next`` API blocks the thread until the task generates a next object reference with ``yield``.
```

Since the ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is just a Python generator, you can also simply use a for loop to
iterate object references. 

If you want to avoid blocking a thread, you can either use asyncio or :ref:`ray.wait API <generators-wait>`.

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_execute_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_execute_end__

.. note::

>     For a normal Python generator, a generator function is paused and resumed when ``next`` function is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Python pauses a generator function is paused and resumes it with ``next`` function
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this rewrite is correct any more, but the suggestion is to use active voice. Be clear about what/who is doing the pausing and resuming.

>     called on a generator. In Ray, a generator task is eagerly executed and sends the result back to the caller,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    called on a generator. Ray eagerly executes a generator task and sends the result back to the caller,
```

>     called on a generator. In Ray, a generator task is eagerly executed and sends the result back to the caller,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    call on a generator. In Ray, a generator task is eagerly executed and sends the result back to the caller,
```

>     and it is never paused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    never pausing it.
```

Reviewer 3: `...Ray eagerly executes a generator task to completion regardless of whether the caller is polling the partial results or not.`

> Error Handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Error handling
```

--------------

> If there's any failure from a generator task (by an application exception or system error such as unexpected node failure),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a generator task has a failure (by an application exception or system error such as an unexpected node failure),
```

> the ``next(gen)`` will return an object reference that contains an exception. When you call ``ray.get``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``next(gen)`` returns an object reference that contains an exception. When you call ``ray.get``,
```

> the exception is raised. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray raises the exception. 
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_exception_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_exception_end__

> As you see from the example, If the task is failed by an application, the object reference with an exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, if the an application fails the task, Ray returns the object reference with an exception
```

> is returned with at a correct order (for example, if the exception is raised after the second yield, the third 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a correct order. or example, if Ray raises the exception after the second yield, the third 
```

> ``next(gen)`` will return an object reference with an exception all the time). If the task is failed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``next(gen)`` returns an object reference with an exception all the time. If a system error fails the task
```

> by a system error (e.g., node failure or worker process failure), the object reference that contains the system level exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by a system error, for example, a node failure or worker process failure, ``next(gen)`` and return the object reference that contains the system level exception
```

> can be returned from ``next(gen)`` any time without an ordering guarantee. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``next(gen)`` any time without an order guarantee. 
```

> It means when you have N yields, the generator can create from 1 to N + 1 object references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have N yields, the generator can create from 1 to N + 1 object references
```

> (N output + ref with a system-level exception) when there are failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(N output + ref with a system-level exception) when failures occur.
```

> Generator from Actor Task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generator from Actor Tasks
```

-------------------------

> Ray generator is compatible with **all execution model of actors**. I.e., it seamlessly works with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ray generator is compatible with **all execution model of actors**.  It seamlessly works with
```

Reviewer 3: **all execution models** ?

> regular actor, :ref:`async actors <async-actors>`, and :ref:`threaded actors <threaded-actors>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regular actors, :ref:`async actors <async-actors>`, and :ref:`threaded actors <threaded-actors>`.
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_actor_model_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_actor_model_end__

> Using Ray Generator with Asyncio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the Ray generator with asyncio
```

--------------------------------

> The returned ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is also compatible with asyncio, which means you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The returned ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is also compatible with asyncio. You can
```

> use ``__anext__`` or ``async for`` loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use ``__anext__`` or ``async for`` loops.
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_asyncio_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_asyncio_end__

> Garbage Collection of Object Referneces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Garbage collection of object referneces
```

---------------------------------------

> The returned ref from ``next(generator)`` is just a regular Ray object reference, and it is distribute ref counted in the same way.

Reviewer: This sentence seems to be grammatically incorrect. I am having trouble offering a suggestion without more context.

> If references are not consumed from a generator via ``next``, they are GC’ed when the generator is GC’ed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If references are not consumed by a generator with``next``, garbage collection removes them when the garbage collector removes the generator.
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_gc_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_gc_end__

> In the following example, ``ref1`` is ref counted like a normal Ray object reference after it is returned. Other references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, Ray counts ``ref1``  a normal Ray object reference after Ray returns it. Other references
```

> that are not consumed via ``next(gen)`` are GC'ed when a generator is GC'ed (in this example, it happens when ``del gen`` is called).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that aren't consumed with ``next(gen)`` are removed by garbage collection when garbage collection removes the generator. In this example, garbage collection happens when you call ``del gen``.
```

Fault Tolerance
---------------

> Every fault tolerance feature from :ref:`fault tolerance features <fault-tolerance>` is also working with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`Fault tolerance features <fault-tolerance>` work with
```

> Ray generator tasks and actor tasks. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray generator tasks and actor tasks. For example:
```

> - :ref:`Task fault tolerance features <task-fault-tolerance>`: ``max_retries``, ``retry_exceptions``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Task fault tolerance features <task-fault-tolerance>`: ``max_retries``, ``retry_exceptions``
```

> - :ref:`Actor fault tolerance features <actor-fault-tolerance>`: ``max_restarts``, ``max_task_retries``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Actor fault tolerance features <actor-fault-tolerance>`: ``max_restarts``, ``max_task_retries``
```

> - :ref:`Object fault tolerance features <object-fault-tolerance>`: object reconstruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Object fault tolerance features <object-fault-tolerance>`: object reconstruction
```

.. _generators-cancel:

Cancellation
------------

> :func:`ray.cancel() <ray.cancel>` works with both Ray generator tasks and actor tasks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :func:`ray.cancel() <ray.cancel>` function works with both Ray generator tasks and actor tasks. 
```

> Semantic-wise, cancelling a generator task has no difference from cancelling a regular task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semantic-wise, cancelling a generator task isn't different from cancelling a regular task.
```

> When a task is cancelled, the reference that contains :class:`TaskCancelledError <ray.exceptions.TaskCancelledError>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you cancel a task, the reference that contains :class:`TaskCancelledError <ray.exceptions.TaskCancelledError>`
```

can be returned from ``next(gen)`` without any special ordering guarantee.

.. _generators-wait:

How to wait for generator without blocking a thread (compatibility to ray.wait and ray.get)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When using a generator, ``next`` API will block its thread until a next object reference is available.
However, this is not ideal all the time. Sometimes you'd like to wait for a generator without blocking a thread.

> Unblocking wait is possible with ray generator with the following ways;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unblocking wait is possible with a Ray generator using the following methods:
```

> Unblocking wait is possible with ray generator with the following ways;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unblocking wait is possible with the Ray generator in the following ways:
```

**Wait until a generator task completes**

``StreamingObjectRefGenerator.completed()`` returns an object reference that is available when a generator task finishes or errors.

> For example, you can do ``ray.get(gen.compelted())`` to wait until a task completes. Note that using ``ray.get`` to ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is not allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can do ``ray.get(gen.compelted())`` to wait until a task completes. Note that using ``ray.get`` to ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` isn't allowed.
```

**Use asyncio and await**

> ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is compatible to asyncio. You can create multiple asyncio tasks that creates a generator task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` is compatible with asyncio. You can create multiple asyncio tasks that create a generator task
```

and wait for it to avoid blocking a thread.

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_concurrency_asyncio_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_concurrency_asyncio_end__

**Use ray.wait**

> ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` could be passed as an input of ``ray.wait``. The generator is considered as "ready" if a next item

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` as an input to ``ray.wait``. The generator is "ready" if a `next item`
```

> is available. Once a generator is found from a ready list, ``next(gen)`` returns the next object reference immediately without blocking. See the below example for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is available. Once a generator is found from a ready list, ``next(gen)`` returns the next object reference immediately without blocking. See the example below for more details.
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_wait_simple_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_wait_simple_end__

> All the input arguments (such as ``timeout``, ``num_returns``, and ``fetch_local``) from ``ray.wait`` works with a generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All input arguments (such as ``timeout``, ``num_returns``, and ``fetch_local``) from ``ray.wait`` work with generators.
```

> ``ray.wait`` can mix up regular Ray object references and a generator as inputs. In this case, the application should handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ray.wait`` can mix regular Ray object references with generators for inputs. In this case, the application should handle
```

> the output inside a ``ready`` list accordingly. Here's an example of mixing up Ray object references and generators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the output inside a ``ready`` list accordingly. An example of mixing Ray object references and generators follows:
```

.. literalinclude:: doc_code/streaming_generator.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __streaming_generator_wait_complex_start__
    :end-before: __streaming_generator_wait_complex_end__

> Thread Safety

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread safety
```

-------------
``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` object is not thread-safe.

Limitation
----------

> There following features are not supported from Ray generators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray generators don't support these features:
```

> - ``throw``, ``send``, and ``close`` APIs are not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``throw``, ``send``, and ``close`` APIs
```

> - ``return`` statement from a generator is not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``return`` statements from generators
```

> - Passing an ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` to another task or actor is not allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Passing ``StreamingObjectRefGenerator`` to another task or actor
```
